Mission

Fix all inconsistencies from the audit in this order:

restore trust in static checks
enforce RBAC annotations on all RPCs
serialize ScyllaDB schema migration through one authority
create an isolated containerized integration cluster
add CI coverage gates so regressions cannot re-enter
close the most important CLI gaps without destabilizing v1

Do not treat this as one giant refactor blob. Do it as a sequence of small, reviewable commits with passing checks after each phase.

Phase 1. Fix make check-services so it actually checks something
Problem

The current check silently passes because it points at paths that do not exist: ./golang/clustercontroller/clustercontroller_server and ./golang/nodeagent/nodeagent_server. Because grep on a missing path exits non-zero, the surrounding shell pattern interprets that as success. The result is a fake green light.

Required changes
Find the real source directories for:
cluster controller server
node agent server
Replace the wrong paths in the Makefile security checks with the real ones.
Change the shell logic so a missing target path is an explicit failure, not an implicit pass.
Split the current check into focused rules:
check-controller-no-exec
check-nodeagent-exec-boundary
check-target-paths-exist
Do not ban syscall wholesale.
Only ban dangerous process-launch primitives for the controller and node-agent boundary.
Target:
os/exec
exec.Command
exec.CommandContext
Optionally also target direct shell launch patterns if present.
Make the check output human-readable failures:
missing directory
forbidden import found
forbidden callsite found
Acceptance criteria
If the checked directory does not exist, make check-services fails.
If os/exec or exec.Command* appears in controller or forbidden node-agent areas, the check fails.
Legitimate syscall usage elsewhere does not fail the check. Claude’s own note explicitly says the syscall check must be refined.
Suggested shell behavior

Use explicit existence tests before grep. Example shape only:

test -d "$DIR" || { echo "missing path: $DIR"; exit 1; }
if grep -R -nE '(^|[[:space:]])"os/exec"|exec\.Command(Context)?\(' "$DIR"; then
  echo "forbidden exec usage in $DIR"
  exit 1
fi
Phase 2. Add RBAC annotations to all missing RPCs
Problem

There are 81 RPCs with zero authz annotations across:

workflow.proto 37
ai_executor.proto 18
ai_watcher.proto 11
ai_memory.proto 9
ai_router.proto 5

This violates the stated rule that all gRPC RPCs must have (globular.auth.authz) annotations. The workflow service is the most critical because it can dispatch and manage cluster operations.

Required changes
Enumerate every RPC in those 5 proto files.
Add a (globular.auth.authz) annotation to every single RPC.
Do not use one lazy catch-all permission for everything.
Define action names by capability family.
Required permission model

Use stable action names grouped like this:

workflow.proto
workflow.read
workflow.list
workflow.dispatch
workflow.cancel
workflow.retry
workflow.resume
workflow.admin
ai_executor.proto
ai.execute
ai.execute.admin
ai.tools.invoke
ai_watcher.proto
ai.watch.read
ai.watch.write
ai.watch.admin
ai_memory.proto
ai.memory.read
ai.memory.write
ai.memory.delete
ai.memory.admin
ai_router.proto
ai.router.read
ai.router.write
ai.router.admin

Map each RPC to the least-privilege action that matches what it actually does.

Additional implementation rules
If the service already uses a generated permission registry or metadata extractor, extend it so these new action strings are surfaced everywhere consistently.
Update any default roles or cluster roles that must include these actions.
For workflow especially:
read/list APIs should not require dispatch rights
dispatch/cancel/retry/resume should not be granted to ordinary authenticated users
admin/debug operations should be separate from normal operator actions
Acceptance criteria
All 81 currently missing RPCs now have (globular.auth.authz) annotations.
Generated code compiles.
Existing interceptors resolve method → action correctly.
There is no RPC left unannotated in those files.
Phase 3. Add CI gate for RBAC annotation coverage
Problem

Even after Phase 2, nothing prevents future regressions. The audit explicitly calls out the absence of an automated check ensuring every RPC has an authz option.

Required changes
Add a CI script, for example:
scripts/check_proto_authz.sh
The script must:
enumerate all .proto files that define services
detect every rpc ...
verify that each RPC block includes (globular.auth.authz)
fail with filename + rpc name for any violation
Wire that script into:
local make check-services or make check-proto
CI pipeline
Add a small allowlist mechanism only if absolutely needed for generated or third-party protos. Avoid broad exclusions.
Acceptance criteria
CI fails on any new RPC without authz annotation.
Local developers can run the same check before commit.
Phase 4. Fix ScyllaDB migration coordination
Problem

The current migration sequence check → apply → validate runs independently on each node. Two nodes can race, both think migration is required, and corrupt partial schema state. The audit says this is not theoretical and already caused real schema corruption during the outage.

Required design

Make schema migration a cluster-coordinated operation with a single authority.

Required implementation
Introduce a migration lease / lock in etcd.
Example key: /globular/persistence/migration/lock
Value should include:
holder node id
holder epoch / lease id
target schema version
start timestamp
Only the cluster leader or one explicit migration coordinator may acquire the lock.
Non-leader nodes must never run schema migrations on startup by themselves.
They may:
check current schema version
report status
block until migration complete
They must not apply migrations
Make migration state explicit in etcd.
Example keys:
/globular/persistence/migration/state
/globular/persistence/migration/target_version
/globular/persistence/migration/last_success
Migration flow:
read current schema version
compare to bundled target version
acquire migration lock
run migration exactly once
validate schema
publish success/failure state
release lock
Crash safety:
use lease-backed lock with TTL
on coordinator death, next leader may retry only after validating whether migration partially applied
migrations must be idempotent or explicitly resume-safe
Startup behavior:
if migration in progress, other nodes wait with bounded backoff
if migration failed, nodes should surface a clear incident instead of racing into their own migrations
Acceptance criteria
Multiple nodes starting simultaneously cannot apply the same migration concurrently.
One node migrates, others observe and wait.
Partial migration produces explicit failure state, not silent corruption.
Phase 5. Create a containerized integration cluster
Problem

make test-integration currently runs against the real 3-node cluster, which is operationally radioactive. The audit correctly says this makes reconciliation and release testing unsafe.

Required changes
Add a reproducible local cluster harness using containers.
It must bring up:
etcd
ScyllaDB
MinIO
at least 3 Globular nodes or node-agent/controller equivalents as needed
any mandatory support services for convergence tests
Add orchestration files:
docker-compose.integration.yml or similar
helper scripts in scripts/testcluster/
Seed the cluster deterministically:
known PKI
known credentials
known base artifacts
known desired state
Add test targets:
make test-integration-local
make test-integration-reconcile
make test-integration-release
make test-integration-migration
Ensure test isolation:
temporary named volumes
cleanup target
no use of production endpoints by default
Required first test scenarios
controller restart during reconciliation
node join / node loss
package rollout to multiple nodes
Scylla migration coordination
failed artifact fetch
workflow retry / cancel
desired vs installed drift detection
Acceptance criteria
No integration target touches the real cluster by default.
A developer can bring up the cluster with one command and tear it down with one command.
Phase 6. Fill CLI gaps that matter for v1 operations
Problem

The audit calls out 40+ missing CLI commands for backup, AI, and monitoring. It also says this is meaningful but not cluster-correctness critical. So do not let this balloon into a side quest dragon.

Required approach

Implement only the high-value operational wrappers first.

Priority CLI additions
Backup
globular backup create
globular backup list
globular backup inspect
globular backup restore
Monitoring
globular monitor status
globular monitor alerts
globular monitor metrics
AI ops
globular ai watcher status
globular ai memory query
globular ai router status
globular ai executor run only if safe and already policy-aligned
Workflow
if missing, add:
globular workflow list
globular workflow get
globular workflow cancel
globular workflow retry
Rules
CLI is a wrapper over existing gRPC APIs, not a second control plane.
Reuse the same authn/authz path as other commands in main.go.
Do not invent ad hoc admin bypasses.
Acceptance criteria
Operators can perform core day-2 workflows from CLI without MCP.
Phase 7. Add regression tests for the fixes
Required tests
Static / CI
Makefile path existence test
forbidden exec usage in controller test
proto authz coverage test
Unit / integration
startup migration race test with 2+ nodes
workflow proto annotations compile and enforce correct action mapping
containerized cluster smoke test
backup CLI roundtrip if backup wrapper added
Acceptance criteria
Every inconsistency from the audit has either:
code fix + test
or documented deferral with issue id and rationale
Constraints Claude must respect
Do not broaden the “no exec” rule to the entire monorepo.
The attached codebase contains legitimate exec.Command(...) usage in older Globular code such as firewall management and restart/platform routines, so the boundary check must stay scoped to controller and node-agent enforcement zones.
Do not ship RBAC annotations without also wiring them into action metadata and role defaults where required.
Do not solve migration coordination with an in-memory mutex. This must be cluster-authoritative, so use etcd lease-backed coordination.
Do not make the containerized test cluster optional “later” work if integration tests still target production-like nodes by default. That is the exact trapdoor identified by the audit.
Do not let CLI work delay security and correctness fixes. Priority order matters.
Suggested commit plan
build: fix check-services target paths and fail on missing directories
build: narrow exec boundary checks to controller and node-agent
proto: add authz annotations to workflow rpc surface
proto: add authz annotations to ai services
ci: enforce authz annotation coverage for all service protos
persistence: serialize scylla migrations with etcd lease lock
test: add containerized integration cluster harness
cli: add backup and monitoring command wrappers
test: add regression coverage for migration and authz gates
Definition of done

This inconsistency set is fixed only when all of the following are true:

make check-services fails correctly on wrong paths and real forbidden patterns
all 81 missing RPC annotations are added
CI prevents future unannotated RPCs
Scylla migration is single-authority and crash-safe
integration tests run on an isolated containerized cluster
the most important operator CLI gaps are closed
each fix has tests or an explicit documented deferral