I’m tracing the version spaghetti from the entry points outward: publish, package creation, and the fields that currently pretend to be authoritative. Then I’ll turn that into hard invariants and a concrete redesign you can wire into Globular without hand-wavy fairy dust.

I found the leak. Right now the package identity is partly coming from whatever config.json or package.json says, and the CLI publish path is basically a courier with no real courthouse. That means version authority lives in the package payload instead of the repository ledger, which is exactly how ghosts like 0.0.5 then later 0.0.2 sneak in.

Thought for 1m 18s

Yes. You are pointing at the right fracture line.

This is not a small bug. It is a source-of-truth bug in layer 1, and if layer 1 lies, the rest of the four-layer model becomes theater with props. Right now the system lets package identity drift between payload, CLI, discovery, and repository. The code shows that the CLI still does a split publish flow, first calling discovery, then uploading the package to repository, which means version authority is not fully centralized in the repository.

Worse, the current repository path still allows same-version overwrite with different content. The upload handler explicitly says that if an artifact with the same identity already exists and the checksum differs, it overwrites the artifact at the same version instead of rejecting it. That is exactly the crack that lets history mutate. A version should be a tombstone in stone, not chalk on a sidewalk. The same code also treats build number 0 as the default and resolves it as “latest” in several paths, which is convenient, but too slippery to be the primary identity model.

And on the producer side, package metadata still leaks version authority from package content. For applications, the deploy path reads package.json and uses its version as part of publish/install flow. For services, the distro/install path builds layout from config["Version"]. That means the package is still helping define its own identity, when it should only describe itself.

So I agree with your instinct:

The package’s internal version must not be the first source of trust.
The repository version ledger must be the source of trust.

What must become invariant

These are the rules I would make non-negotiable.

A released package version is immutable
Once publisher/name/version/platform is published, no new bits can ever be written to that semantic version again. Not even by the owner. Not even with the same build. Not even “just fixing a typo.”
Builds are mutable before release, versions are not
During staging, you may create multiple candidate builds for the same target semantic version. But once one build is promoted to released, the semantic version is sealed.
Discovery/catalog cannot invent version
Discovery must consume repository-approved version metadata, never lead it. Today CLI still publishes to discovery separately before or alongside repository upload. That must end. Repository first, then repository emits catalog registration.
The package payload may declare content version, but not repository version
Internal component versions are metadata only. They help traceability, compatibility, and UI. They do not define package identity.
Monotonic release order per package
For a given publisher/name/channel, the next released semantic version must be greater than the previous released semantic version. No backward insert. No 0.0.5 then later 0.0.2.
Build identifiers are system-generated
Never user-supplied as authority. They can be sortable, unique, timestamp-derived, or ULID-based. But generated by the version service, not the package author.
Repair is explicit and auditable
If history is already corrupted, recovery cannot silently reinterpret old entries. The system must mark repairs, migrations, aliases, quarantines, and supersessions.
The redesign

I would split identity into three distinct layers:

1. Package identity

This is the logical thing the user thinks about.

publisher / package_name / channel

Example:
core@globular.io / cluster-controller / stable

This is the continuity key.

2. Release identity

This is the immutable semantic release label.

version = 1.4.2

This is human-facing and policy-facing.

3. Build identity

This is the actual produced artifact instance.

build_id = 20260416T173455Z_01JQ...
or a ULID / UUIDv7.

This is machine-facing and exact.

So the repository object becomes conceptually:

Package: core@globular.io/cluster-controller
Channel: stable
Release: 1.4.2
Build: 01JQ8Y...
Platform: linux_amd64
Digest: sha256:...
State: STAGED | VERIFIED | RELEASED | DEPRECATED | YANKED | REVOKED | ORPHANED

The critical trick is this:

version and build_id are not the same thing.
A semantic version is a release label. A build is an artifact instance.

The correct state machine

I would use this:

Build lifecycle

DRAFT
STAGED
VERIFIED
REJECTED
ORPHANED

Release lifecycle

PLANNED
RELEASED
DEPRECATED
YANKED
REVOKED

A build becomes eligible for release only after verification.
A release points to exactly one promoted build per platform.

That means:

many candidate builds may exist for 1.4.2 while unreleased
exactly one released build is bound to 1.4.2/linux_amd64
once released, no new build may attach to 1.4.2
The allocator you need

You need a repository-owned version allocator.

Not CLI-owned.
Not package-owned.
Not discovery-owned.

Something like:

AllocateReleaseVersion(package, channel, intent)
AllocateBuildID(package, version, platform)
PromoteBuildToRelease(package, version, buildID)
Publish flow becomes
CLI sends package metadata and bits, but not authoritative version
Repository reads package manifest metadata
Repository validates namespace and package ownership
Repository allocates or validates target release version
Repository creates build_id
Repository stores build as STAGED
Repository verifies digest / structure / manifest compatibility
Repository promotes build to RELEASED
Repository updates catalog/discovery from repository state

That removes the split-brain publish currently visible in the CLI flow.

How version should be chosen

Use SemVer rules for the release version.
Use an auto-generated ID for the build.

Good model

version: user intent or repository-calculated next semver
build_id: generated
build_time: generated
digest: generated

Bad model

“take version from config.json or package.json and trust it”

That is exactly the current smell.

How to decide next version

The CLI can ask for an intent, not an exact release number.

Examples:

publish --bump patch
publish --bump minor
publish --bump major
publish --version 1.4.2 only if policy allows exact pin
publish --snapshot for non-release builds

Repository then enforces:

latest released is 1.4.2
--bump patch becomes 1.4.3
exact 1.4.2 rejected if already released
exact 1.3.9 rejected because non-monotonic
exact 1.5.0 allowed only if greater than latest and policy passes
Handling internal content versions

You were right here too.

A package may contain:

binary version
API version
schema version
manifest version
config format version
dependency versions

Those are component metadata, not release identity.

So store them under something like:

{
  "package": {
    "name": "cluster-controller",
    "publisher": "core@globular.io"
  },
  "release": {
    "version": "1.4.2",
    "channel": "stable"
  },
  "build": {
    "id": "01JQ8Y...",
    "created_at": "2026-04-16T17:34:55Z",
    "digest": "sha256:..."
  },
  "contents": {
    "binary_version": "1.4.2-dev+git.abc123",
    "api_version": "v1",
    "schema_version": "7",
    "dependencies": {
      "envoy": "1.32.1",
      "etcd": "3.6.0"
    }
  }
}

The repository trusts release.version only if it allocated it or validated it.
It never trusts contents.binary_version as package identity.

How to recover from the bad state you already have

This part matters a lot.

You gave the case:

0.0.1 -> 0.0.5 -> 0.0.2

That is historical corruption. You should not “pretend it was fine.”

I would add a migration/repair command:

globular repository repair-versions

It would scan all package histories and classify anomalies:

duplicate version with different digest
descending version after later release
multiple builds under build=0
missing manifest fields
catalog/repository disagreement
Repair policy

For each package history:

Sort all existing artifacts by:
semantic version
release timestamp
build timestamp
Detect illegal cases:
same version, different checksum
later release followed by smaller version
released artifact overwritten in place
Repair without lying:
keep original stored objects
mark illegal releases as ORPHANED, REVOKED, or SUPERSEDED
reattach valid objects under generated build records
rebuild a canonical release ledger
Example repair

Current history:

0.0.1 checksum A
0.0.5 checksum B
0.0.2 checksum C published later

Canonical result:

0.0.1 RELEASED
0.0.5 RELEASED
0.0.2 marked INVALID_NON_MONOTONIC and excluded from “latest”
if C is actually the intended successor to B, create a new release 0.0.6 or 0.0.5+repaired.N only through explicit admin remediation

I would not silently relabel 0.0.2 to 0.0.6. That is too magical.
I would require an explicit repair action.

What to change in code and architecture
1. Kill same-version overwrite

In repository UploadArtifact, this block must die or be restricted to pre-release candidate builds only:

current behavior: same version + different checksum => overwrite
new behavior:
if release exists and is immutable => reject with AlreadyExists
if unreleased staging slot exists => create new generated build candidate, do not overwrite prior build

That is the biggest live grenade in the room.

2. Stop using build number 0 as semantic fog

0 can remain as a backward-compat read alias, but not as the normal identity.
New builds should always get a real generated build ID or at least a nonzero repository-generated build number.

3. Move version authority into repository

CLI publish should become:

globular publish --path ./service --bump patch

The CLI uploads metadata + bits.
The repository chooses the release version, or validates an explicit one.

4. Remove discovery-first publish

The repository should own:

artifact storage
version allocation
release promotion
descriptor registration

The CLI should not separately call discovery to create package identity before repository acceptance. Today it does.

5. Introduce a release ledger

For each package, maintain a ledger entry like:

{
  "package": "core@globular.io/cluster-controller",
  "channel": "stable",
  "latest_released_version": "1.4.2",
  "releases": [
    {
      "version": "1.4.2",
      "released_at": "...",
      "platform_builds": {
        "linux_amd64": "01JQ...",
        "linux_arm64": "01JQ..."
      }
    }
  ]
}

This becomes the monotonic record you compare against.

6. Validate package payload against repository-assigned version

If the internal manifest says binary_version=1.4.1 but the repository release is 1.4.2, that is either:

allowed with warning
or blocked by policy

But either way, it is metadata validation, not identity allocation.

What standard to use

Yes, use a standard SemVer implementation for the release version.

In Go, use a mature semver library for:

parsing
canonicalization
ordering
bumping

You already appear to use a canonicalizer in repository code. Good. Keep that. But canonicalization alone is not enough. You need allocation policy plus immutability enforcement.

For build identity, I would not use plain incrementing integers as the long-term truth. Too easy to race, rewrite, or infer incorrectly. Better choices:

UUIDv7
ULID
timestamp + random suffix

If you still want a sortable numeric build number for UX, keep it as a derived index, not the authority.

Git integration

Git can help, but should not be the root of truth.

Useful:

embed commit SHA
detect dirty tree
record source repo URL
record source tag/branch
derive provenance

Not useful as sole version authority:

many packages may be built outside git
git tags do not enforce repository immutability inside Globular
package history and cluster artifact history are not the same thing

So I would use git as provenance, not authority.

My recommended final model
Repository truth
package identity
release ledger
build identity
lifecycle state
digest
provenance
promotion rules
Package payload truth
content metadata
compatibility info
dependency declarations
internal component versions
CLI responsibility
collect files
declare intent
upload
display resulting assigned version/build
Discovery responsibility
reflect repository-approved releases only
The hard rules I would codify immediately
publisher/name/version/platform released once => immutable forever
different checksum at same released version => reject
backward version publish => reject
exact version publish lower than latest => reject
build id generated only by repository
internal package version != release authority
discovery registration only after repository release promotion
repair operations must leave audit trail and never silently rewrite history
The first implementation slice

If you want the fastest path to stop the bleeding, I would do these 5 changes first:

Change repository upload so same version + different checksum returns error instead of overwrite
Make CLI publish call repository only, not discovery first
Add repository-side AllocateNextVersion with major/minor/patch/exact intents
Store generated build IDs for every new upload
Add a repair scanner that flags non-monotonic version histories

That would turn the current version swamp into a fenced harbor pretty fast.

If you want, I can turn this into a concrete Globular design doc with:

exact invariants
proto definitions
repository schema
CLI command changes
migration plan from the current broken state